# Queries: demand-driven compilation

<!-- toc -->

As described in [the high-level overview of the compiler][hl], the Rust
compiler is still (as of <!-- date-check --> July 2021) transitioning from a
traditional "pass-based" setup to a "demand-driven" system. The compiler query
system is the key to `rustc`'s demand-driven organization. The idea is that
instead of entirely independent passes ([parsing][parser],
[type-checking](./type-checking.md), etc.), a set of function-like *queries*
compute information about the input source. For example, there is a query
called `type_of` which, given the [`DefId`] of some item, will compute the type
of that item and return it to you.

[`DefId`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_span/def_id/struct.DefId.html
[hl]: ./compiler-src.md
[parser]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_parse/index.html

Query execution is *memoized*. The first time you invoke a query, it will go do
the computation, but the next time, the result is returned from a hashtable.
Moreover, query execution fits nicely into *incremental computation*; the idea
is roughly that, when you invoke a query, the result *may* be returned to you
by loading stored data from disk.[^incr-comp-detail]

Eventually, we want the entire compiler control-flow to be query driven. There
will effectively be one top-level query (`compile`) that will run compilation
on a crate; this will in turn demand information about that crate, starting
from the *end*.  For example:

- The `compile` query might demand to get a list of 
  [code generation (`codegen`)][codegen] units (i.e. modules that need to be
  compiled by LLVM).
- Computing the list of `codegen` units invokes a subquery which returns the
  list of all modules defined in the Rust source.
- That query in turn invokes something asking for the 
[High-Level Intermediate Representation (`HIR`)][hir].
- This chain proceeds until we wind up doing the actual parsing.

Although this vision is not fully realized, large sections of the compiler (for
example, generating [Mid-level Intermediate Representation (`MIR`)](./mir/index.md)) 
do currently work exactly like this.

[^incr-comp-detail]: The chapter
["Incremental Compilation in Detail"](queries/incremental-compilation-in-detail.md)
gives a more in-depth description of what queries are and how they
work. If you intend to write a query of your own, this is a good read.

[codegen]: ./backend/codegen.md
[hir]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_hir/index.html

## Invoking queries

Invoking a query is simple. The [`TyCtxt`] ("type context") `struct` offers a
method for each defined query. For example, to invoke the `type_of` query, you
would just do this:

```rust,ignore
let ty = tcx.type_of(some_def_id);
```

[`TyCtxt`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_middle/ty/struct.TyCtxt.html

## How the compiler executes a query

So you may be wondering what happens when you invoke a query method. The answer
is that, for each query, the compiler maintains a cache – if your query has
already been executed, then, the answer is simple: we clone the return value
out of cache and return it (therefore, you should try to ensure that the return
types of queries are cheaply cloneable; insert an [`Rc`] if necessary).

[`Rc`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/rc/index.html

### Providers

If, however, the query is *not* in cache, then the compiler will
try to find a suitable **provider**. A provider is a function which has
been defined and linked into the compiler somewhere that contains the
code to compute the result of the query.

**Providers are defined per-crate.** The compiler maintains a table of
providers for every crate, at least conceptually. Right now, there are really
two sets: 
  1. Providers for queries about the **local crate** (that is, the one
    being compiled), and,
  2. providers for queries about **external crates** (that is, dependencies of
    the local crate). 

Note that what determines the crate that a query is targeting is not the *kind*
of query, but the *key*. For example, when you invoke [`tcx.type_of(def_id)`],
that could be a local query or an external query, depending on what crate the
[`def_id`] is referring to (see the [`self::keys::Key`][Key] trait for more
information on how that works).

`Provider` always has the same signature, taking two arguments: a `tcx` and a
`key`, and returning the result of the query:
```rust,ignore
fn provider<'tcx>(
    tcx: TyCtxt<'tcx>,
    key: QUERY_KEY,
) -> QUERY_RESULT {
    ...
}
```
[`def_id`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/beta/nightly-rustc/rustc_span/def_id/struct.DefId.html
[`tcx.type_of(def_id)`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/beta/nightly-rustc/rustc_middle/ty/context/struct.TyCtxt.html#method.type_of

###  How providers are setup

When the `tcx` is created, it is given the providers by its creator using
the [`Providers`][providers_struct] `struct`. This `struct` is generated by
a `macro` here, but it is basically a big list of function pointers:

[providers_struct]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_middle/query/struct.Providers.html
```rust,ignore
struct Providers {
    type_of: for<'tcx> fn(TyCtxt<'tcx>, DefId) -> Ty<'tcx>,
    ...
}
```

At present, we have one copy of the `struct` for local crates, and one for
external crates, though eventually there may be one copy per crate!

A `Provider` `struct` instance is ultimately created and populated by
[`rustc_driver`] which does this by distributing the work throughout the other
`rustc_*` crates. This is done by invoking various [`provide`][provide_fn]
functions. These functions tend to look something like this:

```rust,ignore
pub fn provide(providers: &mut Providers) {
    *providers = Providers {
        type_of,
        ..*providers
    };
}
```

That is, they take an `&mut Providers` and mutate it in place. Usually we use
the formulation above as sugar, but it could be expressed as `providers.type_of = type_of`
which is equivalent, and so `type_of` would be a top-level function
defined as we saw before. Furthermore, if adding a provider for some other
query, let's call it `fubar`, into the crate above, we can modify the
`provide()` function like so:
```rust,ignore
pub fn provide(providers: &mut Providers) {
    *providers = Providers {
        type_of,
        fubar,
        ..*providers
    };
}

fn fubar<'tcx>(tcx: TyCtxt<'tcx>, key: DefId) -> Fubar<'tcx> { ... }
```

Note that most of the `rustc_*` crates only provide **local providers**. Almost
all **extern providers** wind up going through the 
[`rustc_metadata` crate][rustc_metadata], which loads the information from the
crate metadata. But in some cases there are crates that provide queries for
*both* local and external crates, in which case they define both a `provide`
and a `provide_extern` function, through
[`wasm_import_module_map`][wasm_import_module_map], that [`rustc_driver`] can
invoke.

[provide_fn]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_middle/hir/fn.provide.html
[`rustc_driver`]: ./rustc-driver.md
[rustc_metadata]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_metadata/index.html
[wasm_import_module_map]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_codegen_ssa/back/symbol_export/fn.wasm_import_module_map.html

## Adding a new query

Defining a query takes place in two steps:

1. Declare the query name, its arguments and description.
2. Supply query providers where needed.

To declare the query name and arguments simply add an entry to
the big `macro` invocation in [`compiler/rustc_middle/src/query/mod.rs`][query-mod].
Then add a documentation comment with some _internal_ description.
Finally, provide the `desc` attribute which contains a _user-facing_ description of the query.
The `desc` attribute is shown to the user in query cycles:
```rust,ignore
rustc_queries! {
  /// Records the type of every item.
    query type_of(key: DefId) -> Ty<'tcx> {
      cache_on_disk_if { key.is_local() }
        desc { |tcx| "computing the type of `{}`", tcx.def_path_str(key) }
    }
    ...
}
```

[query-mod]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_middle/query/index.html

A query definition has the following form:
```rust,ignore
query type_of(key: DefId) -> Ty<'tcx> { ... }
^^^^^ ^^^^^^^      ^^^^^     ^^^^^^^^   ^^^
|     |            |         |          |
|     |            |         |          query modifiers
|     |            |         result type
|     |            query key type
|     name of query
query keyword
```

Let's go over these elements one by one:

- **Query keyword:** indicates a start of a query definition.
- **Name of query:** the name of the query method
  (`tcx.type_of(..)`). Also used as the name of a `struct`
  (`ty::queries::type_of`) that will be generated to represent
  this query.
- **Query key type:** the type of the argument to this query.
  This type must implement the [`ty::query::keys::Key`][Key] trait, which
  defines (for example) how to map it to a crate, and so forth.
- **Result type of query:** the type produced by this query. This type
  should (a) not use [`RefCell`] or other interior mutability and (b) be
  cheaply cloneable. Interning or using [`Rc`] or [`Arc`] is recommended for
  non-trivial data types.[^steal]
- **Query modifiers:** various flags and options that customize how the
  query is processed (mostly with respect to [incremental compilation][incrcomp]).

[`RefCell`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/cell/struct.RefCell.html
[`Arc`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/sync/struct.Arc.html
[Key]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_middle/query/keys/trait.Key.html
[incrcomp]: queries/incremental-compilation-in-detail.html#query-modifiers

So, to add a query:

- Add an entry to `rustc_queries!` using the format above.
- Link the provider by modifying the appropriate `provide` method;
  or add a new one if needed and ensure that [`rustc_driver`] is invoking it.

[^steal]: The one exception to those rules is the `ty::steal::Steal` type,
which is used to cheaply modify `MIR` in place. See the definition
of [`Steal`] for more details. New uses of [`Steal`] should **not** be
added without alerting `@rust-lang/compiler`.

[`Steal`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/nightly-rustc/rustc_data_structures/steal/struct.Steal.html

## External links

Related design ideas, and tracking issues:

- Design document: [On-demand Rustc incremental design doc]
- Tracking Issue: ["Red/Green" dependency tracking in compiler]

More discussion and issues:

- [GitHub issue #42633]
- [Incremental Compilation Beta]
- [Incremental Compilation Announcement]

[On-demand Rustc incremental design doc]: https://github.com/nikomatsakis/rustc-on-demand-incremental-design-doc/blob/master/0000-rustc-on-demand-and-incremental.md
["Red/Green" dependency tracking in compiler]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/42293
[GitHub issue #42633]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/42633
[Incremental Compilation Beta]: https://internals.rust-lang.org/t/incremental-compilation-beta/4721
[Incremental Compilation Announcement]: https://blog.rust-lang.org/2016/09/08/incremental.html
